Script Canvas Node Definition reference (#1984)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/scripting/script-canvas/programmer-guide/custom-nodes/custom-node-definition-reference.md

----

### Class

The __Class__ element is used to define the Node's O3DE configuration, many of these attributes configure O3DE's serialization properties.

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------|------------|
| __Name__   | Required |  The name of the Script Canvas Node  | `Name="My Node"` |
| __QualifiedName__  | Required |  Fully qualified name, includes all namespaces, (e.g. ScriptCanvas::Nodes::MyNode) | `QualifiedName="ScriptCanvas::Nodes::MyNode"` |
| __Description__ | Recommended | Describes the node and its functionality, this is displayed as a tooltip on the node | `Description="An example node"` |
| __Category__ | Recommended | Category will define where this node will be places on the Node Palette, you can nest categories by separating with the / character (e.g. "My Nodes/Math") | `Category="Math/Linear Algebra"` |
| __PreferredClassName__ | Optional | In some cases it may be desirable to override the node's class name in the editor, this field does not change functionality, only the node's class name used in the __EditContext__ | `PreferredClassName="A Different Name"`|

> | __Uuid__ | Optional | Allows you to provide a specific Universal Identifier, this is generally generated but in some situations it may be desirable to provide a specific UUID.  | `Uuid="{EE36A690-7C33-445F-B9E8-BD045D6ACC1D}"` |

Author: Yes, generally this should be empty it's only intended for rare circumstances, for example if a node becomes deprecated it may sometimes be useful to specify a new UUID to remap it

> | __Icon__ | Unused | Currently unused, would provide a path for displaying a custom icon associated with a node | `Icon="Icons/ScriptCanvas/Checkpoint.png"` |

Author: There are too many examples out in the wild that use it that I felt it important to call it out.

| __EditAttributes__ | Optional | Allows the ability to provide __EditContext__ attributes in the node's serialization, use the @ character to separate the key/value and separate multiple attributes with a semi colon; | `EditAttributes="AZ::Script::Attributes::ExcludeFrom@AZ::Script::Attributes::ExcludeFlags::All;` `ScriptCanvas::Attributes::Node::TitlePaletteOverride@StringNodeTitlePalette"` |
| __DynamicSlotOrdering__ | Optional | Should be used when the order of slots may change at edit time | `DynamicSlotOrdering="True"` |
----
         

### Examples

```xml
<ScriptCanvas Include="Include/ScriptCanvas/Libraries/Core/Start.h" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
    <Class Name="Start"
        QualifiedName="ScriptCanvas::Nodes::Core::Start"
        PreferredClassName="On Graph Start"
        Uuid="{F200B22A-5903-483A-BF63-5241BC03632B}"
        Category="Timing"
        Version="2"
        GraphEntryPoint="True"
        Description="Starts executing the graph when the entity that owns the graph is fully activated.">

</Class>
```

> ## Execution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Execution slot elements
```

> ### <a name="input"></a>Input

Author: Was this anchor not used? I think I meant to map it from some other location for easy reference.

> ### <a name="input"></a>Input

Reviewer: Hugo doesn't support HTML anchor elements. By default, it will create an anchor from the text in each header automatically. If you want to override that with a custom-defined anchor, the format to use after the header text is `{#my-anchor}`.

> ### <a name="input"></a>Input

Author: I tested them and was able to use them

> ### <a name="input"></a>Input

Reviewer: What did you test, may I ask, and what do you mean when you say you were able to use them?

For example, the link for this specific header is rendered as https://deploy-preview-1984--o3deorg.netlify.app/docs/user-guide/scripting/script-canvas/programmer-guide/custom-nodes/custom-node-definition-reference/#a-nameinputainput.

The anchor at the end there is `#a-nameinputainput`. While technically that is a working link if you click on it from my comments here, it is needlessly complex. If you had just left the header as `## Input`, the anchor would simply be `#input`, which is preferable.

Furthermore, the places where you are trying to use this link are not working properly with your HTML anchor. For example, look at this sentence:

> Parameter is used by the [Input](https://deploy-preview-1984--o3deorg.netlify.app/docs/user-guide/scripting/script-canvas/programmer-guide/custom-nodes/custom-node-definition-reference/#input) and [Output](https://deploy-preview-1984--o3deorg.netlify.app/docs/user-guide/scripting/script-canvas/programmer-guide/custom-nodes/custom-node-definition-reference/#output) elements, they represent data slots on the node.

Click on the **Input** link and you'll see that, while it does scroll to a different place on the page, it's not going to the correct place. It scrolls all the way up to the top. This is because it can't find any `#input` anchor.

> The __Input__ tag is used to configure execution entry slots on a node. Visually these would be on the left side of a node in the Script Canvas editor.

Author: They're the same, I rather not associate nuance to either term which is why I used them interchangeably, we can call them 'slot' as this is the word used throughout the C++ code

### Supported Attributes

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------|------------|
| __Name__ | Required | The name for this input slot | `Name="My Node"` |
| __Description__ | Optional | Describes this input slot, it is displayed as a tooltip in the editor | `Description="Useful node"`|
| __DisplayGroup__ | Optional | Allows slots to be grouped visually | `DisplayGroup="Tests"` |
| __Output__ | Optional | Allows a corresponding output execution slot to be provided | `Output="Done"` |

> | __Latent__| Optional | This only applies if the __Output__ attribute is provided, it signals that the __Output__ slot may not execute immediately and may take more than one frame | `Output="Done" Latent="true"` |

Author: The code generation templates for nodeables do support Latent="True". OutLatent is used by the Grammar and it looks like I missed it.

----

### <a name="output"></a>Output

The __Output__ tag is used to configure execution exit slots on a node. Visually these would be on the right side of a node in the Script Canvas editor.

### Supported Attributes

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Name__ | Required | The name for this input slot | `Name="My Node"` |
| __Description__ | Optional | Describes this input slot, it is displayed as a tooltip in the editor | `Description="Useful node"`|
| __DisplayGroup__ | Optional | Allows slots to be grouped visually | `DisplayGroup="Tests"` |
| __Latent__| Optional | This only applies if the __Output__ attribute is provided, it signals that the __Output__ slot may not execute immediately and may take more than one frame | `Output="Done" Latent="true"` |
----

### Examples

```xml
<Input Name="Start" Output="Started" Description="Use this to start this operation"/>
<Input Name="Stop " Output="Stopped" Latent="true" Description="Use this to stop this operation"/>
```

> ## Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Data slot elements
```

| __Type__ | Required | This is the C++ type of the property. It must be a type exposed to the O3DE serialization context. If the type contains special characters (e.g. `AZStd::vector<int>`) you must use the HTML Entity Codes (e.g. `AZStd::vector&lt;int&gt;`) | `Type="float"` |
| __DefaultValue__ | Optional | Allows you to provide the default value for the property | `DefaultValue="1000.0"`|
| __UIHandler__ | Optional | Allows the user to override the property's default UI Handler in the Node Inspector | `UIHandler="AZ::Edit::UIHandlers::ComboBox"`|
| __DisplayGroup__ | Optional | Allows slots to be grouped visually | `DisplayGroup="Tests"` |
| __IsInput__ | [Grammar Only](#grammar) | Used to define if this property will be placed as an input data slot on a node. This option is not available for Nodeables | `IsInput="True"` or `IsInput="False"` |
| __IsOutput__ | [Grammar Only](#grammar) | Used to define if this property will be placed as an output data slot on a node. This option is only available for Nodeables | `IsOutput="True"` or `IsOutput="False"` |

> ### <a name="propertydata"></a>PropertyData

Author: Any reason to remove the anchors? they allow to easily cross-reference related items

> ### <a name="propertydata"></a>PropertyData

Reviewer: See comment above about the anchor format to use.

        <EditAttribute Key="AZ::Edit::Attributes::PostChangeNotify" Value="&amp;BaseTimer::OnTimeUnitsChanged"/>
    </PropertyData>
</Property>
```

----

----

### <a href="#parameter"></a>Parameter

__Parameter__ is used by the [Input](#input) and [Output](#output) elements, they represent data slots on the node.
 
| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Name__ | | | | 
| __Type__ | Required | This is the C++ type of the property. It must be a type exposed to the O3DE serialization context. If the type contains special characters (e.g. `AZStd::vector<int>`) you must use the HTML Entity Codes (e.g. `AZStd::vector&lt;int&gt;`) | `Type="float"` |
| __Description__ | Optional | Displayed as a tooltip when hovering over the slot | `Description="The radius of the circle"`|
| __DefaultValue__ | Optional | Allows you to provide the default value for the property | `DefaultValue="1000.0"`|
| __DisplayGroup__ | Optional | Allows slots to be grouped visually | `DisplayGroup="Tests"` |
----

### Return

> __Return__ is used by the [Input](#input) element, represents and output data slots on the node. You can think of it as the return value in a function (i.e. `int Foo() { return 42; }`)

Reviewer: I still don't understand what the phrase "represents and output data slots on the node" means. :)

> __Return__ is used by the [Input](#input) element, represents and output data slots on the node. You can think of it as the return value in a function (i.e. `int Foo() { return 42; }`)

Reviewer: Oh! Maybe you meant "and represents output data slots"?

> __Return__ is used by the [Input](#input) element, represents and output data slots on the node. You can think of it as the return value in a function (i.e. `int Foo() { return 42; }`)

Author: yes I meant: _represents an output slot on the node._

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Name__ | Required | The name will be used as the data output slot's name | `Name="Return Value"` | 
| __Type__ | Required | This is the C++ type of the property. It must be a type exposed to the O3DE serialization context. If the type contains special characters (e.g. `AZStd::vector<int>`) you must use the HTML Entity Codes (e.g. `AZStd::vector&lt;int&gt;`) | `Type="float"` |
| __Description__ | Optional | Displayed as a tooltip when hovering over the slot | `Description="The radius of the circle"`|
| __DefaultValue__ | Optional | Allows you to provide the default value for the property | `DefaultValue="1000.0"`|
| __DisplayGroup__ | Optional | Allows slots to be grouped visually | `DisplayGroup="Tests"` |
----

> ### Examples

Reviewer: Either add a usage example for Return, or refer the reader to the usage example for Branch.

Author: As a reader I wouldn't know I need to go look for it there when I'm reading about this specific topic. I don't think it's a problem if the example is relevant in both areas, I'd prefer to keep each area as self-contained as possible. And when not possible or too redundant I was relying on anchors to help navigate readers to the relevant sections.

Reviewer 2: It's fine to keep examples for Branch and Return separate. This section is missing an example though. Just has the "### Examples" header, then the "### Branch" header in the next line.

### <a href="#branch"></a>Branch

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Name__ | Required | Specifies the name of the branch, in C++ this will create a function with the name `Call<BranchName>` where `<BranchName>` is the specified name. 
----

### Examples

The following example creates a node that will return `Success` and an `Entity Spawn Ticket` or return `Failed`
```xml
<Input Name="Create Ticket" OutputName="Ticket Created">
    <Parameter Name="Prefab" Type="const AzFramework::Scripts::SpawnableScriptAssetRef&amp;" Description="Prefab source asset to spawn"/>
	<Branch Name="Success">
        <Return Name="Entity Spawn Ticket" Type="AzFramework::EntitySpawnTicket"/>
    </Branch>
    <Branch Name="Failed"/>
</Input>
```
The above node's C++ code would be used in the following way:
```cpp
void CreateSpawnTicketNodeable::CreateTicket(const AzFramework::Scripts::SpawnableScriptAssetRef& prefab)
{
    auto ticket = m_spawnableScriptMediator.CreateSpawnTicket(prefab);
    if (ticket.IsSuccess())
    {
        CallSuccess(ticket.GetValue());
    }
    else
    {

>         AZLOG_ERROR("Unable to Create Spawn Ticket - A valid prefab was not provided");

Reviewer: Is there a way for this log error to be generated automatically? If not, and this function was written manually, I'd remove the log error from this example.

Author: Wouldn't it be good to to provide best practices?

Author: This code is not autogen'd it's an example of how a user would write the inner-workings of a node. Does it read like this was autogen'd? I may need to add some clarification to avoid confusion

Reviewer: Oh, I see that now. I think I misinterpreted the sentence, "The above node’s C++ code would be used in the following way" to mean that the XML in the example generated the code that follows. I'm not sure why I thought that. ;)

If I made that mistake, perhaps others might too, so I wonder if it would be helpful to either clarify a little more that the C++ code is calling into the code that the preceding XML generated, or perhaps include the C++ code that the XML generated in between the two. Thoughts?

        CallFailed();
    }
}
```
----

> ## Functions
> 
> Functions are a way to expose C++ functions directly into the Behavior Context. This results in a way quick and easy way to create libraries of functions that are available for use in Script Canvas.

Reviewer: A reader might confuse the label "Functions" here with Script Canvas Functions. I think you mean this:
```suggestion
## Free function elements

[Script Canvas Free Function Nodes](./custom-free-function-nodes) expose C++ functions directly into the Behavior Context. This provides a quick and easy way to create libraries of functions that are available for use in Script Canvas.

Use the following elements when defining Free Function Nodes:

### Function
```

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Name__ | Required | The name of the function | `Name="RandomColor"` |
| __Branch__ | Optional | Specifies that the function be used to evaluate the branching condition | `Branch="IsValidFindPosition"` |
| __BranchWithValue__ | Optional |  | `BranchWithValue="True"` |

> Functions can use the [Parameter](#propertydata) element to specify data inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Parameter

Functions can use the [Parameter](#parameter) element to specify data inputs.
```

```xml
<Function Name="RandomColor">
    <Parameter Name="MinValue" DefaultValue="Data::ColorType(0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f)"/>
    <Parameter Name="MaxValue" DefaultValue="Data::ColorType(1.0f, 1.0f, 1.0f, 1.0f)"/>
</Function>

<Function Name="IsValidFindPosition"> <!-- Used by ContainsString to evaluate the condition to branch -->
    <Parameter Name="Position" Description="The string find position to check against"/>
</Function>

<Function Name="ContainsString" Branch="IsValidFindPosition" BranchWithValue="True">
    <Parameter Name="Source" Description="The string to search in."/>
    <Parameter Name="Pattern" Description="The substring to search for."/>
    <Parameter Name="Search From End" Description="Start the match checking from the end of a string."/>
    <Parameter Name="Case Sensitive" Description="Take into account the case of the string when searching."/>
</Function>

```

> Functions can use the __Out__ element to specify the name for each of the [Branch](#branch) results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Out

Functions can use the __Out__ element to specify the name for each of the [Branch](#branch) results.
```

__NOTE:__ There may only be 2 __Out__ elements for branching functions, if more than 2 exist an error will be displayed during compilation.

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Name__ | Required | The name of the function | `<Function Name="Clamp">` |

```xml
<Function Name="BranchExample" Branch="IsPositive" BranchWithValue="True">
    <Out Name="Is Positive"/>
    <Out Name="Is Negative"/>
</Function>
```

> ----
> 
> ## Library

Reviewer: If `Library` is used exclusively with free function nodes, include them under "Free function elements".
```suggestion

### Library
```

> Library is used to create a collection of functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a collection of functions using the `Library` element.
```

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Include__ | Required | The relative path to the C++ include file that will contain the library function declarations | `Include="Include/ScriptCanvas/Libraries/Math/Color.h"` |
| __Namespace__ | Required | The namespace that holds the C++ functions in this library | `Namespace="ScriptCanvas::ColorFunctions"` |

> | __Category__ | Recommended | Category will define where this node will be places on the Node Palette, you can nest categories by separating with the / character (e.g. "My Nodes/Math") | `Category="Math/Color"` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| __Category__ | Recommended | Category defines where this node will appear in the Node Palette. You can nest categories by separating with the `/` character. | `Category="Math/Color"` |
```

```xml
<Library Include="Include/ScriptCanvas/Libraries/Math/MathFunctions.h"
        Namespace="ScriptCanvas::MathRandoms"
        Category="Math/Random">

    <!-- Function Definitions -->

</Library>
```
----

## <a href="#grammar"></a> Grammar

> The Script Canvas Grammar nodes are nodes that have a direct translation into the backend's execution format, currently this is the Lua language. It is not generally required to create new grammar nodes if the Script Canvas Nodeable format is sufficient, but in some situations it may be desired to extend the Script Canvas grammar.

Reviewer: No need to use "currently" when there's no guarantee if and when this will change. The documentation should be updated if this changes.
```suggestion
Grammar nodes are nodes that have a direct translation into the backend's execution format, which is Lua. You do not need to create new grammar nodes if the Script Canvas Nodeable format is sufficient. However, in some situations it might be desirable to extend the Script Canvas grammar.
```

> There are many shared elements and attributes between the Grammar nodes and the node definitions, this part of the guide will cover the differences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many shared elements and attributes between the grammar nodes and the node definitions. This section will cover the differences.
```

| __UIHandler__ | Optional | Allows the user to override the property's default UI Handler in the Node Inspector | `UIHandler="AZ::Edit::UIHandlers::ComboBox"`|
| __DisplayGroup__ | Optional | Allows slots to be grouped visually | `DisplayGroup="Tests"` |

```xml
<EditProperty UiHandler="AZ::Edit::UIHandlers::Default" FieldName="m_numericPrecision" Name="Precision" Description="The precision with which to print any numeric values.">
    <EditAttribute Key="AZ::Edit::Attributes::Min" Value="0"/>
    <EditAttribute Key="AZ::Edit::Attributes::Max" Value="24"/>
</EditProperty>
```

### EditAttribute

__EditProperty__ may also use [EditAttribute](#editattribute)

### DynamicDataSlot

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Name__ | Required | The name of the data slot | `Name="Format"` |
| __Description__ | Optional | Displayed as a tooltip when hovering over the slot | `Description="The radius of the circle"`|
| __ConnectionType__ | Required | `ScriptCanvas::ConnectionType::Input` or `ScriptCanvas::ConnectionType::Output` | `ConnectionType="ScriptCanvas::ConnectionType::Input"` |

> | DynamicType | Required | `Value`, `Container`, or `Any` | `DynamicType="ScriptCanvas::DynamicDataType::Container"` | 

Reviewer 2: It would be very helpful to have a description on what DynamicDataSlots are. 

Additionally, it would help to have description on the attributes **ConnectionType** and **DynamicType**. For **ConnectionType**, it may be enough for the user to understand what DynamicDataSlots are, in order to figure out whether to choose an input or output Connection type. For DynamicType, when should a user choose value, container, or any?

Reviewer: Agree with adding a short description on what Dynamic Data Slots are. And include a link to the topic: `[Dynamic Data Slots](./dynamic-data-slots)`.

Author: Agreed, will add it

| __UIHandler__ | Optional | Allows the user to override the property's default UI Handler in the Node Inspector | `UIHandler="AZ::Edit::UIHandlers::ComboBox"`|
| __DisplayGroup__ | Optional | Allows slots to be grouped visually | `DisplayGroup="Tests"` |

```xml
<EditProperty UiHandler="AZ::Edit::UIHandlers::Default" FieldName="m_numericPrecision" Name="Precision" Description="The precision with which to print any numeric values.">
    <EditAttribute Key="AZ::Edit::Attributes::Min" Value="0"/>
    <EditAttribute Key="AZ::Edit::Attributes::Max" Value="24"/>
</EditProperty>
```

### EditAttribute

__EditProperty__ may also use [EditAttribute](#editattribute) data.

### DynamicDataSlot

| __Attribute__   |  __Requirements__  | __Description__ | __Example__ |
| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Name__ | Required | The name of the data slot | `Name="Format"` |
| __Description__ | Optional | Displayed as a tooltip when hovering over the slot | `Description="The radius of the circle"`|
| __ConnectionType__ | Required | `ScriptCanvas::ConnectionType::Input` or `ScriptCanvas::ConnectionType::Output` | `ConnectionType="ScriptCanvas::ConnectionType::Input"` |

> | DynamicType | Required | `Value`, `Container`, or `Any` | `DynamicType="ScriptCanvas::DynamicDataType::Container"` | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| __DynamicType__ | Required | `Value`, `Container`, or `Any` | `DynamicType="ScriptCanvas::DynamicDataType::Container"` | 
```

| ---------- | ------------| ------------| ------------| 
| __Name__ | Required | The name to replace the field's name, cosmetic only | `<SerializedProperty Name="m_numericPrecision"/>` |
| __FieldName__ | Required | The name of the __Property__ or __SerializedProperty__ | `FieldName="m_numericPrecision"` |
| __Description__ | Optional | Displayed as a tooltip when hovering over the slot | `Description="The radius of the circle"`|
| __UIHandler__ | Optional | Allows the user to override the property's default UI Handler in the Node Inspector | `UIHandler="AZ::Edit::UIHandlers::ComboBox"`|
| __DisplayGroup__ | Optional | Allows slots to be grouped visually | `DisplayGroup="Tests"` |

```xml
<EditProperty UiHandler="AZ::Edit::UIHandlers::Default" FieldName="m_numericPrecision" Name="Precision" Description="The precision with which to print any numeric values.">
    <EditAttribute Key="AZ::Edit::Attributes::Min" Value="0"/>
    <EditAttribute Key="AZ::Edit::Attributes::Max" Value="24"/>
</EditProperty>
```

### EditAttribute

__EditProperty__ may also use [EditAttribute](#editattribute) data.

### DynamicDataSlot

> A Dynamic Data Slot is a slot that does not have a predefined type, the type is acquired by the slot when a connection is made or when a variable reference is created. The type of the slot may be a value, a container or a general purpose slot that supports 'Any' type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Dynamic Data Slot is a slot that does not have a predefined type; the type is acquired by the slot when a connection is made or when a variable reference is created. The type of the slot may be a value, a container, or a general purpose slot that supports 'Any' type.
```
